Evaluating Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
for Texturing Synthetic Data
Thomas Lips1 and Francis wyffels1
Abstract—Buildinggenericroboticmanipulationsystemsoften explore various design choices and pipelines for diffusion-
requireslargeamountsofreal-worlddata,whichcanbedificultto based texturing. To generate the synthetic images, we first
collect. Synthetic data generation offers a promising alternative,
create a 3D scene and obtain the annotations for that scene.
but limiting the sim-to-real gap requires significant engineering
We then texture the scene by either adding random textures
efforts.Toreducethisengineeringeffort,weinvestigatetheuseof
pretrainedtext-to-imagediffusionmodelsfortexturingsynthetic to all elements or by using a diffusion model to generate the
imagesandcomparethisapproachwithusingrandomtextures,a textures. The process is illustrated in Figure 1.
commondomainrandomizationtechniqueinsyntheticdatagen-
eration. We focus on generating object-centric representations, We focus on pixel-level representations that are often used
suchaskeypointsandsegmentationmasks,whichareimportant in robotic manipulation: keypoints and segmentation masks.
for robotic manipulation and require precise annotations. We These representations require precise annotations and there-
evaluatetheefficacyofthetexturingmethodsbytrainingmodels
fore we first create an explicit 3D scene instead of directly
on the synthetic data and measuring their performance on real-
generating images from text prompts using a text-to-image
world datasets for three object categories: shoes, T-shirts, and
mugs. Surprisingly, we find that texturing using a diffusion diffusion model: From the 3D scene, we can extract pixel-
modelperformsonparwithrandomtextures,despitegenerating perfect annotations. In addition, we need to ensure that the
seeminglymorerealisticimages.Ourresultssuggestthat,fornow, diffusion model does not alter the semantics of the scene
using diffusion models for texturing does not benefit synthetic
during texturing as this would invalidate the annotations. For
data generation for robotics.
example, the diffusion model cannot alter the shape of the
The code, data and trained models are available at https:
object or change its pose in the image. To accomplish this,
//github.com/tlpss/diffusing-synthetic-data.git.
we use a Controlnet [14] to condition on both a depth image
of the scene and a prompt, as in [12], [15].
I. INTRODUCTION
We evaluated the efficacy of the data generation methods
Building generic robotic manipulation systems often re- by measuring the downstream performance of models trained
quires learning-based methods to deal with the diversity in on the data. We generated data for static scenes of 3 different
environments and objects. The performance of these learned object categories lying on a table: shoes, T-shirts and mugs.
models largely depends on the amount of data available The models were evaluated on real-world test datasets using
to train them. Real-world (robot) data collection is time- common metrics for each representation: mean average pre-
consuming [1]–[3]. Therefore, the amount of data is often cision (mAP) for segmentation and average keypoint distance
a bottleneck to the creation of generic robotic manipulation (AKD) for keypoint detection.
systems.Pretrainedfoundationmodelscanreducethisneedfor
Surprisingly, we found that texturing using a diffusion
task-specific data, but they cannot yet cover all use cases [4].
modelperformssimilarlytousingrandomtextures.Inaseries
A parallel approach to overcome this data bottleneck is to
of additional experiments, we observed that both methods
train the robot system on synthetically generated data instead
exhibitlimitedscalingbehaviorandthatusingLLM-generated
of real-world data. The main difficulty with synthetic data
prompts resulted in the best performance for diffusion-based
is to make sure that models trained on this synthetic data
texturing.
transfer well to the real-world, i.e., to limit the sim-to-real
performancegap[5].Inpractice,thisoftenrequiressignificant To summarize, our contributions are as follows:
amountsofmanualengineeringfor3Dassetgeneration,scene
composition and texturing. [6]–[10]. In this work we focus on
• We are the first to use text-to-image models to generate
texturing,whichcanbesummarizedascreatingtheappearance
synthetic data for keypoint detection, an important task
of 3D objects and scenes by specifying the optical properties
for robotic manipulation systems which requires fine-
(colorbeingthemostimportantone)ofeachpartofanobject.
grained annotations.
Recently, researchers have sought to (partially) outsource this
• We extensively compare diffusion-based synthetic data
worktoneuralnetworks,forexample,bygeneratingsynthetic
texturingagainstusingrandomtexturesandfindtheyper-
images using text-to-image diffusion models [11]–[13].
form similarly on both keypoint detection and semantic
Inthiswork,wefurtherinvestigatetheuseoftext-to-image
segmentation tasks.
diffusion models to texture RGB images of a 3D scene and
• We provide insight into the use of diffusion models
compare this method against using random textures. We also
for synthetic data generation by analyzing the scaling
behavior of both methods and evaluating a number of
1AIandRoboticsLab,GhentUniversity-imec
design choices.
Technologiepark126,9052Zwijnaarde,Belgium
correspondingauthor:Thomas.Lips@UGent.be
4202
voN
51
]OR.sc[
1v46101.1142:viXra
Fig.1. Left:Inthiswork,wecomparetext-to-imagediffusionmodelsagainstrandomtexturesfortexturing3Dscenesinasyntheticdatagenerationpipeline.
Right:Weevaluatetheefficacyofthesyntheticdataonreal-worlddataforbothkeypointdetectionandsegmentation.
II. RELATEDWORK that directly training on the underlying dataset of the gen-
erative model can outperform training on synthetic images
A. Synthetic Data Generation
generated by the diffusion model. [23], [28] have focused on
Synthetic data generation offers a compelling alternative using textual inversion [29] to generate data of less-familiar
to manual data collection for supervised machine learning: categories, which is an important limitation of using text-to-
It provides arbitrary amounts of perfectly labeled data en- image models for synthetic data generation.
abling the desired generalizations. The main challenge lies in
Forsegmentation,apixel-perfectobjectmaskisrequiredin
overcoming the sim-to-real gap to ensure models trained on
addition to controlling the object category with a textual de-
syntheticdatageneralizetoreal-worldscenarios[5].Common
scription. [13], [26], [27] use the cross-attention between text
strategies to overcome this gap include domain randomiza-
and images in Stable Diffusion [30] to generate these masks
tion [16], in which the appearance and shape of objects,
automatically. [26] uses self-attention to further improve the
or the composition of the scene is varied beyond what is
generated masks and generates multi-class annotations.
considered realistic, and domain adaptation [17], in which
the differences between synthetic and real data are explicitly For pose estimation, [15] uses 3D meshes to generate edge
learned. Despite these recipes, achieving strong sim-to-real maps and then renders images for these edge maps using
performanceoftenrequiressignificanthumanefforttoimprove a Controlnet. They also report results for segmentation and
the diversity and quality of assets (object shapes, materials) classification, improving on previous methods that do not use
and scene compositions used for data generation [6]–[8]. explicit 3D control.
Researchers have tried to reduce human effort using gen- For data augmentation, [11] augments robot trajectories by
erative models. For instance, [18] uses a class-conditioned inpainting parts of the image. [12] first renders depth images
GAN[19]totrainclassifiersonimagesgeneratedbytheGAN. of an object and then uses a Controlnet [14] to texture them,
[20] goes beyond image-level semantics and trains a decoder after which they are used to augment the robot trajectories.
on the latent codes of a GAN to obtain segmentation masks
In [12], [15], Controlnet [14] is used to condition on both
and keypoints for generated images automatically. However,
textpromptsandrendersof3Dobjectstoincreasecontrolover
the quality of the images generated by such GANs is limited.
the semantics of the generated images.
Furthermore,theseGANsneedtobeexplicitlytrainedoneach
Various prompt strategies have been explored for the diffu-
category. Recently, large, pretrained text-to-image diffusion
sion models, including fixed templates [24], generated image
models[21]havebeenexploredtoovercometheselimitations.
captions[24],[27]andpromptsgeneratedbyLLMs[13],[15].
In this work, we require precise, pixel-level annotations.
B. Text-to-image diffusion models for synthetic data
We, therefore, follow [12], [15] and condition on both text
Text-to-image diffusion models [22] have been used to prompts and renders of 3D scenes using a Controlnet with
generate synthetic data for image classification [15], [23]– Stable Diffusion. Our work is most related to [13], but they
[25], semantic segmentation [13], [26], [27], 3D pose esti- do not consider keypoint detection. We also evaluate multi-
mation [15] and augmentation of robot trajectories [11], [12]. stagepipelinesfordiffusionmodeltexturingandcomparewith
For image classification, [24] show that diffusion-generated random textures on both objects and backgrounds, instead of
syntheticdata doesnotscaleas wellasreal data.[25]showed only on the background.
III. SYNTHETICDATAGENERATION 2) diffusion texturing: We use a depth-conditioned text-to-
image diffusion model to texture the scene. More accurately,
In this work, we generate synthetic images of static scenes
texture the image of the 3D scene.
containing an object on a table surface to enable generic
We first generate a list of descriptions for both the object’s
robotic manipulation of the object category.
appearance and plausible scene backgrounds. We then sample
The data generation process consists of two steps: In the descriptions and scenes, and pass the description to the dif-
first step we gather 3D meshes, annotate these meshes and fusion model, together with a depth image of the scene. The
usethemtogenerate3Dscenes.Inthesecondstep,wetexture diffusion model then outputs an RGB image of the scene.
the scene to provide the desired visual diversity. Combining By also conditioning on a depth image, we make sure
the annotations from the first step with the textured images that this texturing does not alter the semantics of the object,
obtained after the second step, we obtain a diverse dataset for ensuringtheaccuracyofthepredeterminedsceneannotations.
the object category with pixel-accurate labels. We use Controlnet [14] for this image conditioning and use
For the second step, we compare different approaches to the Stable Diffusion 1.5 [22] text-to-image model throughout
texture the scene, either using random textures, a common this work.
technique in domain randomization, or by using text-to-image
diffusion models. Both stages are described in more detail
IV. EXPERIMENTS
in the next sections. Figure 1 illustrates the data generation
We evaluated the data generation procedures described in
process used in this work.
previous section on three object categories: mugs, shoes and
T-shirts. We generated a dataset for each category and trained
models for two object representations: keypoint detection and
A. Scene Generation
segmentation masks. We then reported the performance of
For each object category that we want to create synthetic these models on our real-world test datasets. Section IV-A
data for, we first need to acquire a set of meshes. The meshes providesmoredetailsaboutthesyntheticandrealdatasets.The
do not need to be of a very high quality and in particular tasks and the metrics used to evaluate them are introduced in
do not require accurate UV-maps, which are often hard to SectionIV-B.Theremainingsectionsdescribetheexperiments
get. In addition to gathering the meshes, we also need to we conducted, comparing diffusion-based texturing against
obtain the required annotations. In this work, these are the using random textures in Section IV-C and further exploring
3D positions of the semantic keypoints and the object masks. different aspects of the diffusion-based texturing pipeline in
The object masks require no additional labeling as they can Section IV-D.
be obtained from the render engine. The keypoints can be
manually annotated, but it is often possible to determine them
A. Object categories & datasets
automatically based on the mesh geometry.
We evaluated three object categories: mugs, shoes, and T-
Once we have the meshes and the required annotations, we
shirts on a tabletop setting. For each category, we generated
generate 3D scenes of the objects.To model the table surface,
synthetic data using the methods described in Section III. For
we simply use a 2D plane. To introduce the desired scene
the mugs we gathered 100 meshes from the Objaverse [31]
geometry variations, we randomize the table’s dimensions as
dataset. 214 shoe meshes were obtained from the Google
well as the object and camera pose.
Scanned Objects dataset [32]. For the T-shirts, we used 250
Inthesescenes,asweknowthecameraintrinsicsandextrin-
meshes from [10]. For each category, 2500 distinct scenes
sics,wecanprojectallannotationstothe2Dimages,obtaining
were generated by varying the mesh pose, the size and
pixel-perfectannotations.Togeneratevisualdiversity,wealso
orientation of the table and the camera pose. Fig 1 shows a
need to texture the scene, which is discussed next.
numberofmeshesandgenerated3Dscenes.5000imageswere
generated from these scenes by sampling different camera
poses for each scene, which were then textured using one of
B. Texturing
the methods described in Section III-B. We used Blender [33]
Totexture(animageof)thescene,wecomparetwodifferent to generate the scenes and random texture datasets. To create
approaches: in the first approach, we simply apply random the diffusion textures, we used Huggingface Diffusers [34].
textures to the elements of the scene. In the second, we use Using an NVIDIA RTX3090 GPU, it took about 3s to render
a text-to-image diffusion model and condition it on a depth a512x512imagewithrandomtexturesusingCycles,Blender’s
image of the 3D scene and a suitable prompt. Each approach physically-based renderer. Running inference on the diffusion
is now discussed in more detail. model for texturing also takes around 3s per image.
1) random textures: With this method, we apply a random We evaluated the performance on a real-world test dataset
texturetothemeshesoftheobjectandthesurface.Inaddition and also provided a baseline dataset with real images to put
we use a 360 image as scene background to further increase the results in perspective. For the T-shirts we used the aRTF
visual diversity. We follow [10] and use textures and 360 dataset from [10], for the mugs and shoes we collected and
images from PolyHaven1. annotated datasets manually: For the evaluation dataset we
gathered a set of mugs and shoes and took pictures with a
1https://polyhaven.com/ smartphone in various backgrounds. We gathered another set
TABLEI TABLEII
NUMBEROFIMAGESANDUNIQUEOBJECTSUSEDINTHEREAL-WORLD PERFORMANCEOFTHEDIFFERENTTEXTURINGMETHODSFORALL
EVALUATIONANDBASELINEDATASETS. OBJECTCATEGORIESANDTASKS.RANDOMTEXTURESPERFORMSIMILAR
TODIFFUSIONTEXTURES.BOTHOUTPERFORMTHEREALBASELINE.
traindataset evaluationdataset
keypointAKD(↓) segmAP(↑)
category #images #objects #images #objects
Trainingdataset Mugs Shoes Tshirts Mugs Shoes Tshirts
Mugs 1500 21 350 15
Shoes 2000 15 300 15 realdatabaseline 21.7 33.7 25.6 0.97 0.88 0.87
Tshirts 210 15 400 20
randomtextures 18.3 13.4 37.9 0.97 0.94 0.75
diffusiontexturing 17.4 19.6 45.8 0.99 0.95 0.93
ofmugsandshoesforthetrainingdataset,butthistimeuseda
robottoauto-collectimagesfromvariousangles.Backgrounds common image metrics such as CLIP-score [41] to quantify
and objects are distinct in the train and test splits, to properly thedatasetquality,butwefoundthesetocorrelateverypoorly
measure generalization. All images were manually annotated. with the downstream task performance and therefore do not
The dataset sizes and number of distinct objects are given in report them in this paper.
Table I. The number of objects is similar to [1]. The number
of training images is about an order of magnitude smaller and C. Comparing Texturing Methods
more training images would likely increase the performance
We now compare the performance of synthetic data gener-
of the real-world baseline. Fig. 1 shows images from the real
ated with random textures against data textured using a diffu-
datasets on the right.
sionmodel,asdescribedinSectionIII-B.Theperformanceof
thesyntheticdatageneratedbythedifferenttexturingmethods
B. Performance Evaluation is given in Table II. We also provide the performance of a
real-worldtraindatasetasbaseline.Weobservedthatdiffusion
We used two different tasks to evaluate the performance of
texturesoftenperformbest,thoughtheirperformancewasvery
the synthetic data: semantic keypoint detection and instance
comparable to the random textures. Finally, we observed that
segmentation. Both require precise annotations and are often
both random textures and diffusion textures outperform the
used in robotics [1], [10], [35]. For each task, we briefly
real data baseline in most cases, confirming the efficacy of
discuss the training setup and the metric used to evaluate per-
our synthetic data pipelines.
formancebelow.Werefertotheaccompanyingcoderepository
for more details.
1) KeypointDetection: Following[10],[36],weformulated D. Further Exploration of Diffusion Texturing
keypointdetectionaspixel-wiseregressionoftargetheatmaps. Next to comparing the diffusion texturing methods against
Each semantic category is mapped onto a different heatmap. random textures and a real baseline, we have performed a
Ground truth heatmaps are generated from the annotations by number of additional experiments. With these experiments we
creating a Gaussian blob around each ground truth keypoint. aim to validate some design choices and to provide additional
The predicted heatmaps are regressed to the ground truth insight.
heatmaps using a binary cross entropy loss. The model is We compared different strategies to generate prompts for
a Unet [37]-like encoder-decoder, where the encoder is a the diffusion models, evaluated the scaling behavior of both
pretrained MaxVIT [38] model. methods, explored multi-staged diffusion pipelines, compared
To measure performance, we used the average keypoint the Controlnet with a regular diffusion model and ablated the
distances (AKD) between the ground truth keypoints and the conditioningscaleparameterusedfortheControlnet.Allthese
predicted keypoint with the highest probability. experiments and their results are reported in the remainder of
For the T-shirts, we used the same 12 keypoints as in [10]. this section.
For the shoes, we defined 3 keypoints on the nose, heel and 1) Prompting Strategy: In this experiment we compared
tip. Finally, we defined three keypoints for the mugs on the three different prompting strategies.
handle, bottom and top rim. These keypoints differ slightly The first, and simplest strategy, is to use a fixed caption for
from [1], as we found it easier to annotate keypoints that are each category, e.g., A photo of a shoe.
on the surface of the object. The keypoints are visualized in Tocreatediversepromptsandtherebymorediverseimages,
Figure 1. we also used a BLIP [42] model to caption images from
2) Instance Segmentation: For instance segmentation, we the real training sets for each category. We then used these
usedYOLOv8[39].Allhyperparametersaresetattheirdefault captions as prompts for the diffusion model. This method
value and we use the small model variant, pretrained on aims to match the prompts to the real (target) images. We
the COCO dataset [40]. To measure the performance, we collectedapproximately3000promptsforeachcategoryusing
report the mean average precision (mAP) over different IoU this strategy.
thresholds ranging from 0.5 to 0.95, which is the default For the final strategy we queried an LLM (we used Google
segmentation metric for COCO [40]. Gemini) to generate descriptions using following prompt for
Inadditiontomeasuringtaskperformanceofmodelstrained each object as well as for the table surfaces that are used in
on the synthetic data, which is expensive, we have tried thescene:provideadescriptionforX.Includecolor,patterns,
TABLEIII
COMPARISONOFDIFFERENTPROMPTINGSTRATEGIESFORTHE
ONE-STAGEDATAGENERATIONPIPELINE.USINGPROMPTSGENERATED
BYANLLMPRODUCEDTHEBESTRESULTS.
AKD(↓) mAP(↑)
strategy Mugs Shoes Tshirts Mugs Shoes Tshirts
classname 22.8 23.4 66.4 0.98 0.90 0.77
BLIPcaptions 16.3 25.2 45.9 0.99 0.94 0.90
LLMprompts 17.4 19.6 45.8 0.99 0.95 0.93
Fig.3. Illustrationoftheone-stageapproachissue:thebackgroundandobject
promptareentangledinthevisualoutput.Thethree-stageapproachmanaged
toseparatethem(thoughthetableperspectiveiswrong).
3) multi-stage diffusion texturing: We have noticed two
shortcomings with the diffusion texturing approach described
in section III-B: the diffusion model tends to blend the
description of the background with the description of the
model on the one hand, and it sometimes alters the object
whenitsapparentsizeintheimageissmall.Weillustratedthe
formerinFigure3.Inanattempttoovercometheseissues,we
Fig. 2. Scaling behavior of the different texturing approaches. For both also explored multi-stage pipelines in which we only texture
diffusion textures and random textures, the performance improves with
parts of the scene at each step. We describe our two- and
increasingdata,thoughitstartstoplateauaround5,000images.
three-step approach below, after which we compare it against
the one-stage approach described in section III-B.
materialsandothervisualcharacteristics.Werandomlycom- two-stage diffusion In the first stage, we condition a
bined descriptions for the object and the table, obtaining a set diffusion model on a depth image and a prompt describing
of 5000 prompts for each category. the object, but we now crop the depth image to the bounding
For each prompting strategy, we generated 5000 images box of the object instead of the entire scene. In the second
using the one-stage diffusion texturing pipeline and trained stage, we condition the diffusion model on the background
models on these datasets for both tasks. The results are text prompt to inpaint the background of the image.
providedinTableIII.Usingafixedtemplateperformedworse Though this effectively overcomes both issues with the
than using BLIP captions or LLM-generated prompts. The single-stage approach, it introduces a new issue. During the
LLM-prompts scored slightly better than the BLIP captions. inpainting stage, the diffusion model sometimes extends the
In addition, using LLM-prompts does not require real target object, in an attempt to smoothen the foreground-background
imagesmakingthisstrategymoreflexible.Therefore,weused transition. This changes the object semantics, hence reducing
the LLM-generated prompts in all other experiments of the data quality. To mitigate this issue, as in [12], we apply a
paper. dilation to the inpainting mask to create a ’buffer’.
Our findings are in line with [24], where the authors also three-stage diffusion To completely eliminate the afore-
found fixed templates inferior to BLIP captions. LLM-based mentioned issue, we also explore a three-stage approach. In
prompts are a.o. used in [13], [15], but to the best of our this approach, we first texture the scene without the object, so
knowledge, have not been compared explicitly against other with an empty table. We use the two-stage method described
prompting strategies for synthetic data generation. before, where we now crop on the table. We then crop the
2) Data Scaling Behavior: We have also explored the object mask and again condition a diffusion model on the
scaling behavior of both texturing methods. To this end, we depth image and object prompt to texture the object, which is
generated a dataset with 10,000 images using both random thenoverlayedontothetexturedimageoftheemptytable.This
texturing and the one-stage diffusion texturing. We then cre- should enable the model to focus on the different elements
ated dataset slits with various sizes and trained models for of the scene, while leaving the object semantics unchanged.
both keypoint detection and segmentation on all datasets. The Figure 3 illustrates this.
performance of these models can be seen in Figure 2. We We evaluated both approaches against the one-stage ap-
observed that for both diffusion and random textures, the proach from section III-B. For each approach, we generated
performance increased as the dataset size increases. However, 5000 images using the same set of prompts and 3D scenes
around 5000 images, the performance starts to plateau, in- as in section IV-A. The results are presented in table IV.
dicating that neither method was able to bridge the sim-to- We observed that the one-stage and three-stage approaches
real gap completely and obtain optimal performance. Based significantly outperform the two-stage approach. The three-
on this experiment, we have used a dataset size of 5000 for stageapproachperformedsimilarlytotheone-stageapproach.
all experiments in this paper. However, it takes thrice as much time to produce each image.
TABLEIV
COMPARISONOFDIFFERENTDIFFUSIONTEXTURINGAPPROACHES.THE
ONE-STAGEAPPROACHHASTHEBESTOVERALLPERFORMANCE.
keypointAKD(↓) segmAP(↑)
Approach Mugs Shoes Tshirts Mugs Shoes Tshirts
one-stage 17.4 19.6 45.8 0.99 0.95 0.93
two-stage 19.8 21.7 49.3 0.75 0.70 0.62
three-stage 20.9 19.3 38.3 0.96 0.91 0.71
TABLEV
COMPARISONBETWEENUSINGACONTROLNETASINTHEONE-STAGE
Fig. 4. Comparison of average keypoint distances for different values of
PIPELINEFROMSECTIONIII-BANDINPAINTINGWITHASTABLE
the Controlnet conditioning scale (CCS). The optimal value depends on the
DIFFUSIONMODEL.THECONTROLNETSIGNIFICANTLYIMPROVESTHE
category,but1.5(markedingreen)isasensibledefault.
PERFORMANCE.
AKD(↓) mAP(↑)
V. DISCUSSION
DataPipeline Mugs Shoes Tshirts Mugs Shoes Tshirts
one-stage 17.4 19.6 45.8 0.99 0.95 0.93 In this work we have compared text-to-image diffusion
inpainting 26.3 48.0 95.2 0.30 0.42 0.43 models against random textures for texturing synthetic data.
We have observed that the diffusion-based texturing pipeline
doesnotoutperformtherandomtextures.Thiswassurprising,
as the diffusion-textured images appeared more realistic to
Therefore, we used the one-stage approach in the remainder
us, and therefore we expected them to reduce the sim-to-
of this paper.
real gap. We suspect this increased realistic appearance is
4) Image Conditioning: With this experiment, we aimed countered both by the tendency of the diffusion network to
to validate the use of image-conditioned Controlnets [14] for slightly alter the object semantics (e.g., change the shape of
data generation instead of using inpainting of object masks the mug handle slightly), polluting the annotations, and by
(which are also available from our 3D scenes) with vanilla the diffusion models leaving strong artifacts in the synthetic
text-to-image diffusion models as in [11]. We compared the images on which the models can then overfit (e.g., blurring
one-stagediffusionmethodfromSectionIII-Bagainstsequen- the background). Further research is required to test these
tially inpainting the object mask and background mask. The hypotheses, but there seems to be a big difference between
results are presented in Table V and confirm the necessity of appearing realistic and actually matching the distribution of
Controlnet-style image conditioning. We observed that with real-world images.
inpainting, the diffusion model tends to alter the object se-
In addition to the performance, the data generation speed is
mantics significantly, rendering the predetermined annotations
also important. We have not optimized this in our paper, the
invalid. Conditioning on (depth) images of the scenes using a
single-stage diffusion pipeline and random textures pipeline
Controlnet, reduces this problem.
both took about 3 seconds to texture an image. Both can
5) Controlnet Conditioning Scale: Controlnet [14] diffu- be sped up significantly and although diffusion models are
sion models, have various hyperparameters that influence the becoming faster, we believe that the random textures pipeline
inference process. In this paper, we set out to assess the out- will nonetheless be faster when fully optimized.
of-the-box performance of diffusion models for generating Finally,wenotethattheperformanceofthediffusion-based
synthetic data. Therefore, we have not performed rigorous pipeline stronglydepends on thesynthetic datacontext. There
hyperparameter optimizations; instead, we used the default are limits to the semantic knowledge of a diffusion mode, im-
values from the Diffusers library after validating them quali- posed by the dataset it was trained on. There exist techniques
tatively. However, we found that the Controlnet conditioning to insert knowledge about new semantic categories [29], but
scale(CCS),whichdetermineshowmuchimportanceisgiven these come with additional engineering and data collection
to the input image (the depth image of the scene in our effort.Fordiffusion-basedtexturing,theperformancecanalso
case), has a profound impact on the performance. Therefore depend on the camera angle. We observed for example how
we compared the performance for different values of this images in which the mug handle was prominently visible
parameter for all categories on the keypoint detection task. tended to be more realistic than images in which the mug
TheresultsofthisexperimentareshowninFig.4.Theresults handle was occluded. This is in line with [15].
confirmed the impact of this parameter and showed how the All in all, our diffusion-based texturing pipeline does not
optimal value varies across the different categories. In this providemuchgainsinperformanceovertherandomtexturing
paper we wanted to use the same hyperparameters for all approach and increases complexity. At the same time, neither
categoriesand,basedontheresults,chose1.5asdefaultvalue method scales until it has a perfect performance, so better
fortheremainderofthepaper.Toobtainoptimalperformance approachesarestillneeded.Improvinggenerativemodels,both
for a single object category – which was not our goal – this text-to-imageandtext-to-3Dmodels,isthebestpathtoreduce
parameter should be tuned carefully though. engineering effort in synthetic data generation and will result
in diffusion-based texturing improving random textures. End- [11] T. Yu, T. Xiao, A. Stone, J. Tompson, A. Brohan, S. Wang, J. Singh,
to-endsyntheticdatageneration,asin [13],reducescomplex- C.Tan,J.Peralta,B.Ichteretal.,“Scalingrobotlearningwithseman-
ticallyimaginedexperience,”inRoboticsSienceandSystems,2023.
ity but requires methods to annotate the keypoints afterwards,
[12] Z. Chen, S. Kiami, A. Gupta, and V. Kumar, “Genaug: Retargeting
which is even harder than for segmentation masks due to behaviors to unseen situations via generative augmentation,” in Pro-
the increased precision and semantic granularity. In addition, ceedingsoftheRobotics:ScienceandSystemsConference,2023.
[13] C. Ma, Y. Yang, C. Ju, F. Zhang, J. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, and
our explicit procedure offers controllability of the generation
Y.Wang,“Diffusionseg:Adaptingdiffusiontowardsunsupervisedobject
process, allowing to further steer the data distribution. discovery,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2303.09813,2023.
[14] L. Zhang, A. Rao, and M. Agrawala, “Adding conditional control
to text-to-image diffusion models,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
VI. CONCLUSION InternationalConferenceonComputerVision,2023,pp.3836–3847.
[15] W. Ma, Q. Liu, J. Wang, A. Wang, X. Yuan, Y. Zhang, Z. Xiao,
Inthisworkweevaluatedtheuseoftext-to-imagediffusion
G.Zhang,B.Lu,R.Duan,Y.Qi,A.Kortylewski,Y.Liu,andA.Yuille,
models to generate synthetic data for keypoint detection and “Generatingimageswith3dannotationsusingdiffusionmodels,”2024.
segmentation in the context of robotic manipulation. We have [Online].Available:https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.08103
[16] J. Tremblay, A. Prakash, D. Acuna, M. Brophy, V. Jampani, C. Anil,
validated several design choices of our diffusion-based textur-
T. To, E. Cameracci, S. Boochoon, and S. Birchfield, “Training deep
ingpipelineinSectionIV-Dtoensuretheyareappropriateand networks with synthetic data: Bridging the reality gap by domain
to provide insight. Surprisingly, our diffusion-based pipeline randomization,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
visionandpatternrecognitionworkshops,2018,pp.969–977.
does not outperform texturing the 3D scenes using random
[17] D. Ho, K. Rao, Z. Xu, E. Jang, M. Khansari, and Y. Bai, “Retinagan:
textures, which is a conceptually simpler approach that works Anobject-awareapproachtosim-to-realtransfer,”in2021IEEEInter-
similarly out of the box for all objects and camera angles, un- nationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA). IEEE,2021,
pp.10920–10926.
like the diffusion pipeline. Although using generative models
[18] V.Besnier,H.Jain,A.Bursuc,M.Cord,andP.Pe´rez,“Thisdatasetdoes
remains an interesting option to reduce engineering effort in not exist: training models from generated images,” in ICASSP 2020-
synthetic data generation, it does not provide many gains for 2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing(ICASSP). IEEE,2020,pp.1–5.
synthetic image texturing at this time.
[19] I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley,
S.Ozair,A.Courville,andY.Bengio,“Generativeadversarialnetworks,”
CommunicationsoftheACM,vol.63,no.11,pp.139–144,2020.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
[20] Y.Zhang,H.Ling,J.Gao,K.Yin,J.-F.Lafleche,A.Barriuso,A.Tor-
This project is supported by the Research Foundation Flan- ralba, and S. Fidler, “Datasetgan: Efficient labeled data factory with
minimalhumaneffort,”inProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConferenceon
ders (FWO) under Grant numbers 1S56022N and by the
ComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,2021,pp.10145–10155.
euROBIn Project (EU grant number 101070596). The authors [21] J.Ho,A.Jain,andP.Abbeel,“Denoisingdiffusionprobabilisticmodels,”
also thank Victor-Louis De Gusseme for his input. Advancesinneuralinformationprocessingsystems,vol.33,pp.6840–
6851,2020.
[22] R.Rombach,A.Blattmann,D.Lorenz,P.Esser,andB.Ommer,“High-
REFERENCES resolutionimagesynthesiswithlatentdiffusionmodels,”inProceedings
oftheIEEE/CVFconferenceoncomputervisionandpatternrecognition,
[1] L.Manuelli,W.Gao,P.Florence,andR.Tedrake,“kpam:Keypointaf- 2022,pp.10684–10695.
fordancesforcategory-levelroboticmanipulation,”inTheInternational [23] B.Trabucco,K.Doherty,M.Gurinas,andR.Salakhutdinov,“Effective
SymposiumofRoboticsResearch. Springer,2019,pp.132–157. dataaugmentationwithdiffusionmodels,”inTheTwelfthInternational
[2] S.Levine,P.Pastor,A.Krizhevsky,J.Ibarz,andD.Quillen,“Learning ConferenceonLearningRepresentations,2024.
hand-eyecoordinationforroboticgraspingwithdeeplearningandlarge- [24] L.Fan,K.Chen,D.Krishnan,D.Katabi,P.Isola,andY.Tian,“Scaling
scale data collection,” The International journal of robotics research, lawsofsyntheticimagesformodeltraining...fornow,”inProceedingsof
vol.37,no.4-5,pp.421–436,2018. theIEEE/CVFConferenceonComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,
[3] C. Lynch, A. Wahid, J. Tompson, T. Ding, J. Betker, R. Baruch, 2024,pp.7382–7392.
T.Armstrong,andP.Florence,“Interactivelanguage:Talkingtorobots [25] S. Geng, C.-Y. Hsieh, V. Ramanujan, M. Wallingford, C.-L. Li, P. W.
inrealtime,”IEEERoboticsandAutomationLetters,2023. Koh,andR.Krishna,“Theunmetpromiseofsynthetictrainingimages:
[4] K.Kawaharazuka,T.Matsushima,A.Gambardella,J.Guo,C.Paxton, Usingretrievedrealimagesperformsbetter,”2024.[Online].Available:
and A. Zeng, “Real-world robot applications of foundation models: a https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.05184
review,”AdvancedRobotics,vol.38,no.18,pp.1232–1254,2024. [26] Q. Nguyen, T. Vu, A. Tran, and K. Nguyen, “Dataset diffusion:
[5] K.ManandJ.Chahl,“Areviewofsyntheticimagedataanditsusein Diffusion-based synthetic data generation for pixel-level semantic seg-
computervision,”JournalofImaging,vol.8,no.11,2022. mentation,”AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems,vol.36,
[6] T. Hodanˇ, V. Vineet, R. Gal, E. Shalev, J. Hanzelka, T. Connell, 2024.
P.Urbina,S.N.Sinha,andB.Guenter,“Photorealisticimagesynthesis [27] W.Wu,Y.Zhao,M.Z.Shou,H.Zhou,andC.Shen,“Diffumask:Syn-
forobjectinstancedetection,”in2019IEEEinternationalconferenceon thesizingimageswithpixel-levelannotationsforsemanticsegmentation
imageprocessing(ICIP). IEEE,2019,pp.66–70. usingdiffusionmodels,”inProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFInternational
[7] E. Wood, T. Baltrusˇaitis, C. Hewitt, S. Dziadzio, T. J. Cashman, and ConferenceonComputerVision,2023,pp.1206–1217.
J. Shotton, “Fake it till you make it: face analysis in the wild using [28] B. De Wilde, A. Saha, R. P. ten Broek, and H. Huisman, “Medical
synthetic data alone,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international diffusiononabudget:textualinversionformedicalimagegeneration,”
conferenceoncomputervision,2021,pp.3681–3691. arXivpreprintarXiv:2303.13430,2023.
[8] F.Plum,R.Bulla,H.K.Beck,N.Imirzian,andD.Labonte,“replicant: [29] R.Gal,Y.Alaluf,Y.Atzmon,O.Patashnik,A.H.Bermano,G.Chechik,
a pipeline for generating annotated images of animals in complex andD.Cohen-Or,“Animageisworthoneword:Personalizingtext-to-
environments using unreal engine,” Nature Communications, vol. 14, imagegenerationusingtextualinversion,”inTheEleventhInternational
no.1,p.7195,2023. ConferenceonLearningRepresentations,2023.
[9] O.M.Andrychowicz,B.Baker,M.Chociej,R.Jozefowicz,B.McGrew, [30] R.Rombach,A.Blattmann,D.Lorenz,P.Esser,andB.Ommer,“High-
J.Pachocki,A.Petron,M.Plappert,G.Powell,A.Rayetal.,“Learning resolutionimagesynthesiswithlatentdiffusionmodels,”inProceedings
dexterousin-handmanipulation,”TheInternationalJournalofRobotics oftheIEEE/CVFconferenceoncomputervisionandpatternrecognition,
Research,vol.39,no.1,pp.3–20,2020. 2022,pp.10684–10695.
[10] T. Lips, V.-L. De Gusseme, and F. wyffels, “Learning keypoints for [31] M.Deitke,D.Schwenk,J.Salvador,L.Weihs,O.Michel,E.VanderBilt,
robotic cloth manipulation using synthetic data,” IEEE Robotics and L. Schmidt, K. Ehsani, A. Kembhavi, and A. Farhadi, “Objaverse: A
AutomationLetters,vol.9,no.7,pp.6528–6535,2024. universe of annotated 3d objects,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp.
13142–13153.
[32] L.Downs,A.Francis,N.Koenig,B.Kinman,R.Hickman,K.Reymann,
T. B. McHugh, and V. Vanhoucke, “Google scanned objects: A high-
quality dataset of 3d scanned household items,” in 2022 International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2022, pp.
2553–2560.
[33] Blender Online Community, “Blender - a 3d modelling and rendering
package,”http://www.blender.org,BlenderFoundation.
[34] P. von Platen, S. Patil, A. Lozhkov, P. Cuenca, N. Lambert, K. Rasul,
M.Davaadorj,D.Nair,S.Paul,S.Liu,W.Berman,Y.Xu,andT.Wolf,
“Diffusers: State-of-the-art diffusion models.” [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers
[35] M. Vecerik, J.-B. Regli, O. Sushkov, D. Barker, R. Pevceviciute,
T.Rotho¨rl,R.Hadsell,L.Agapito,andJ.Scholz,“S3k:Self-supervised
semantickeypointsforroboticmanipulationviamulti-viewconsistency,”
inConferenceonRobotLearning. PMLR,2021,pp.449–460.
[36] X. Zhou, D. Wang, and P. Kra¨henbu¨hl, “Objects as points,” arXiv
preprintarXiv:1904.07850,2019.
[37] O.Ronneberger,P.Fischer,andT.Brox,“U-net:Convolutionalnetworks
for biomedicalimage segmentation,”in Medical imagecomputing and
computer-assisted intervention–MICCAI 2015: 18th international con-
ference,Munich,Germany,October5-9,2015,proceedings,partIII18.
Springer,2015,pp.234–241.
[38] Z.Tu,H.Talebi,H.Zhang,F.Yang,P.Milanfar,A.Bovik,andY.Li,
“Maxvit: Multi-axis vision transformer,” in European conference on
computervision. Springer,2022,pp.459–479.
[39] G. Jocher, A. Chaurasia, and J. Qiu, “Ultralytics yolov8,” 2023.
[Online].Available:https://github.com/ultralytics/ultralytics
[40] T.-Y. Lin, M. Maire, S. Belongie, J. Hays, P. Perona, D. Ramanan,
P. Dolla´r, and C. L. Zitnick, “Microsoft coco: Common objects in
context,”inComputerVision–ECCV2014:13thEuropeanConference,
Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014, Proceedings, Part V 13.
Springer,2014,pp.740–755.
[41] J.Hessel,A.Holtzman,M.Forbes,R.L.Bras,andY.Choi,“Clipscore:
Areference-freeevaluationmetricforimagecaptioning,”arXivpreprint
arXiv:2104.08718,2021.
[42] J.Li,D.Li,C.Xiong,andS.Hoi,“Blip:Bootstrappinglanguage-image
pre-trainingforunifiedvision-languageunderstandingandgeneration,”
in International conference on machine learning. PMLR, 2022, pp.
12888–12900.
